Feat(cv_deploy): Support environment variables as a way to manage proxy settings (#6082)
aristanetworks/avd: ansible_collections/arista/avd/roles/cv_deploy/README.md

Reviewer: the feature applies to cv_workflow too, but the detailed how-to is cv_deploy-
only. I would add a short note in cv_workflow docs saying the same env-var discovery applies when proxy settings are not explicitly passed.

--8<--
```

#### Proxy server support

The `arista.avd.cv_deploy` role supports connecting to CloudVision through an **HTTP CONNECT** proxy server.

> Below settings allow modifying the default proxy-related behavior. The values below are the default values.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Use the settings below to modify proxy behavior. The fields currently display the default values
```

```yaml
# Set FQDN/IP of the HTTP CONNECT proxy server.
# proxy_host: <str>

# Set target TCP port of the HTTP CONNECT proxy server.
proxy_port: 8080

# Set authentication username for the HTTP CONNECT proxy server.
# proxy_username: <str>

# Set authentication password for the HTTP CONNECT proxy server.
# proxy_password: <str>
```

> `cv_deploy` role can also discover proxy server settings using environment variables. Please refer to the [Proxy server support in cv_deploy](../../../../../docs/howto/cv_deploy/proxy.md) how-to guide for additional details.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`cv_deploy` role can also discover proxy server settings using environment variables. Please refer to the [Proxy Server Support in cv_deploy](../../../../../docs/howto/cv_deploy/proxy.md) how-to guide for additional details.
```

    It is important to note that plain HTTP is used by AVD only for the initial CONNECT request to establish the tunnel with the CloudVision through proxy server. Once the TCP tunnel to CloudVision through proxy server is active, all subsequent AVD communication — including both REST and gRPC calls — is protected within a secure TLS session(s) established between AVD and CloudVision ***inside*** the TCP proxy tunnel.

There are two ways to enable proxy server for `cv_deploy`: explicitly and via environment variables.

!!! Note

    If proxy-related settings are passed to `cv_deploy` explicitly and execution environment has proxy-related environment variables set (`https_proxy`/`HTTPS_PROXY`/`all_proxy`/`ALL_PROXY`/`no_proxy`/`NO_PROXY`), such environment variables will be ignored for all REST and gRPC calls initiated by `cv_deploy`.

### Configure proxy settings explicitly

To enable proxy server explicitly, set `proxy_host`. Setting `proxy_port` (port `TCP/8080` will be used by default), `proxy_username` and `proxy_password` is optional.

> If valid `proxy_host` (must be non-empty string) and `proxy_port` (greater than 0, less than 65536) are set, `cv_deploy` will ignore (for both REST and gRPC calls) any proxy-related environment variables (`https_proxy`/`HTTPS_PROXY`/`all_proxy`/`ALL_PROXY`/`no_proxy`/`NO_PROXY`) and will force all REST and gRPC egress connections through this proxy.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If valid `proxy_host` (must be non-empty string) and `proxy_port` (1-65535) are set, `cv_deploy` will ignore (for both REST and gRPC calls) any proxy-related environment variables (`https_proxy`/`HTTPS_PROXY`/`all_proxy`/`ALL_PROXY`/`no_proxy`/`NO_PROXY`) and will force all REST and gRPC egress connections through this proxy.
```

Reviewer 3: this repeats the note above. Do we need it twice?

Author: Used suggested port range format and removed `Note` as it was indeed saying the same thing

proxy_password: "avd_proxy_password"
```

!!! None

    All special symbols present in the explicitly passed proxy username and password will be automatically encoded by AVD.

    Example:

    ```yaml
    proxy_host: proxy.local.domain
    proxy_port: 3128
    proxy_username: "p:r/o$x@yuser"
    proxy_password: "p:r/o$x@ypassword"
    ```

    will be equal to setting the following via the environment variable: `http://p%3Ar%2Fo%24x%40yuser:p%3Ar%2Fo%24x%40ypassword@proxy.local.domain:3128`

> ### Configure proxy settings using environment variables

Reviewer 3: I think this section is way to detailed for a user-facing doc. Maybe we could just refer to some RFC or similar that explains the behavior of these environment variables.

Author: My understanding is that this is more a convention and is not regulated by any RFC. Therefore packages/libraries are not obliged to use the same logic/etc (like some support uppercase env variable although others don't) although do follow it in most cases. Because of this i just wanted to be very clear about actual proxy-related behavior implemented here for AVD so that users don't need to guess or rely on other tools (like curl or requests) hoping that their behavior would match us 100%

Author: Also removed large table with no_proxy comparison examples for different patterns

Author: All these extra details were moved to how-to guide

> If proxy-related settings are not passed to `cv_deploy` explicitly, `cv_deploy` will try to discover usable proxy server (scheme is `http`, host is a non-empty string, port is greater than 0 and less than 65536) using environment variables in the following order:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If proxy-related settings are not passed to `cv_deploy` explicitly, `cv_deploy` will try to discover usable proxy server (scheme is `http`, host is a non-empty string, port is greater in the range 1-65535) using environment variables in the following order:
```

Author: Applied suggestion

    - Check `all_proxy` environment variable. Proceed to the next environment variable if it's not set. Otherwise if valid proxy settings are discovered, use this proxy server.

    - Check `ALL_PROXY` environment variable. If valid proxy settings are discovered, use this proxy server.

    If no valid proxy settings are discovered after checking all interesting environment variables in step 2, `cv_deploy` will not use any proxy server for its outbound REST and gRPC requests.

Value of the proxy bypass environment variables supported by AVD must be a comma-separated string of the following supported items:

- Literal `*`

- FQDN

- FQDN + PORT

- wildcard domain

- wildcard domain + PORT

- IPv4 address

- IPv4 CIDR

- IPv6 address

- IPv6 CIDR

Example of a string with all types of valid values:

```code
export no_proxy='*,www.arista.io,www.arista.io:443,.arista.io,.arista.io:443,34.67.65.165,34.67.65.165/32,34.67.65.0/24,2a06:98c1:58::1f6,2a06:98c1:58::1f6/128,2a06:98c1:58::/64'
```

Table below explains how each of the items in the environment variable above would impact an AVD decision tree of selecting proxy bypass settings:

!!! Note

>     Convention `<fqdn/ip>:<port>` used in `Matching CloudVision destinations` and `Non-matching CloudVision destinations` columns of the table below means that AVD is instructed to run deployment against CloudVision / CVaaS `<fqnd/ip>` over port `<port>`. Non-standard port assumes usage of an intermediate proxy/load-balancer.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    Convention `<fqdn/ip>:<port>` used in `Matching CloudVision destinations` and `Non-matching CloudVision destinations` columns of the table below means that AVD is instructed to run deployment against CloudVision / CVaaS `<fqdn/ip>` over port `<port>`. Non-standard port assumes usage of an intermediate proxy/load-balancer.
```

Author: Fixed

    cv_strict_system_mac_address: true
    ```

#### Proxy server support

> The `arista.avd.cv_deploy` role supports connecting to CloudVision through an **HTTP CONNECT** proxy server.

Reviewer: somehow I feel like the warning in here made sense (though it is important in the other one as well) given that it warns of a potential credential breach and people may stop here.

We can decide to ignore this comment and merge :)

Author: Added same warning section under role's configuration but now this can trigger "duplication" concerns)
